===== p214
C h a p t e r 8 :
I n h e r i t a n c e
181
Using final to Prevent Inheritance
Sometimes you will want to prevent a class from being inherited. To do this, precede the
class declaration with final. Declaring a class as final implicitly declares all of its methods
as final, too. As you might expect, it is illegal to declare a class as both abstract and final
since an abstract class is incomplete by itself and relies upon its subclasses to provide
complete implementations.
Here is an example of a final class:
final class A {
// ...
}
// The following class is illegal.
class B extends A { // ERROR! Can't subclass A
// ...
}
As the comments imply, it is illegal for B to inherit A since A is declared as final.
The Object Class
There is one special class, Object, defined by Java. All other classes are subclasses of Object.
That is, Object is a superclass of all other classes. This means that a reference variable of type
Object can refer to an object of any other class. Also, since arrays are implemented as classes,
a variable of type Object can also refer to any array.
Object defines the following methods, which means that they are available in every object.
Method
Purpose
Object clone( )
Creates a new object that is the same as the object being cloned.
boolean equals(Object object)
Determines whether one object is equal to another.
void finalize( )
Called before an unused object is recycled.
Class getClass( )
Obtains the class of an object at run time.
int hashCode( )
Returns the hash code associated with the invoking object.
void notify( )
Resumes execution of a thread waiting on the invoking object.
void notifyAll( )
Resumes execution of all threads waiting on the invoking object.
String toString( )
Returns a string that describes the object.
void wait( )
void wait(long milliseconds)
void wait(long milliseconds,
int nanoseconds)
Waits on another thread of execution.
The methods getClass( ), notify( ), notifyAll( ), and wait( ) are declared as final. You
may override the others. These methods are described elsewhere in this book. However,
notice two methods now: equals( ) and toString( ). The equals( ) method compares the
contents of two objects. It returns true if the objects are equivalent, and false otherwise.

===== p215
The precise definition of equality can vary, depending on the type of objects being
compared. The toString( ) method returns a string that contains a description of the object
on which it is called. Also, this method is automatically called when an object is output
using println( ). Many classes override this method. Doing so allows them to tailor a
description specifically for the types of objects that they create.
182
P a r t I :
T h e J a v a L a n g u a g e

===== p216
9
Packages and Interfaces
T
his chapter examines two of Java’s most innovative features: packages and interfaces.
Packages are containers for classes that are used to keep the class name space
compartmentalized. For example, a package allows you to create a class named List,
which you can store in your own package without concern that it will collide with some
other class named List stored elsewhere. Packages are stored in a hierarchical manner and
are explicitly imported into new class definitions.
In previous chapters, you have seen how methods define the interface to the data in
a class. Through the use of the interface keyword, Java allows you to fully abstract the
interface from its implementation. Using interface, you can specify a set of methods that
can be implemented by one or more classes. The interface, itself, does not actually define
any implementation. Although they are similar to abstract classes, interfaces have an
additional capability: A class can implement more than one interface. By contrast, a class
can only inherit a single superclass (abstract or otherwise).
Packages
In the preceding chapters, the name of each example class was taken from the same
name space. This means that a unique name had to be used for each class to avoid name
collisions. After a while, without some way to manage the name space, you could run out
of convenient, descriptive names for individual classes. You also need some way to be
assured that the name you choose for a class will be reasonably unique and not collide
with class names chosen by other programmers. (Imagine a small group of programmers
fighting over who gets to use the name “Foobar” as a class name. Or, imagine the entire
Internet community arguing over who first named a class “Espresso.”) Thankfully, Java
provides a mechanism for partitioning the class name space into more manageable
chunks. This mechanism is the package. The package is both a naming and a visibility
control mechanism. You can define classes inside a package that are not accessible by
code outside that package. You can also define class members that are only exposed
to other members of the same package. This allows your classes to have intimate
knowledge of each other, but not expose that knowledge to the rest of the world.
183
